# Conclusions 

Throughout this report we have observed the central but ambivalent
role played by public actors in the construction of blockchain. We
have seen how knowledge regarding cryptography, distributed systems,
and, more generally, the architecture of the internet, is
fundamentally structured by the relationships between governments,
companies, and universities. We have observed how issues such as the
security, privacy, auditability, storage, and ownership of information
have frequently been problematised in the interest of maintaining
independence from governments. The explicit intention of the Bitcoin
project -- to do away with all forms of trusted third parties
(financial and governmental institutions and centralised servers) in
the context of electronic financial transactions -- follows a similar
logic.

The Bitcoin project is entirely non-governmental in nature; it is an
autonomous project with no centralised management and is conceptually
uncontrollable. To illustrate this situation, we examined how
Wikileaks used Bitcoin to counter the global financial blockade it
found itself subjected to. More generally, we observed how the Bitcoin
protocol was quickly integrated for use in global trade and finance.
Although Bitcoin is not associated with any particular legal entity,
it cannot avoid national regulations altogether. The desire of
governments and companies to regulate Bitcoin and its derivatives and
to control how they are used has given rise to some innovative
normatives strategies.

We have seen how the financial involvement of major industrial and
financial actors in Bitcoin's technical structure -- its blockchain --
has largely determined the ways in which it has evolved in terms of
functionality, terminology, and outlook. Major industrial players have
adapted blockchain to suit their own operational constraints and have
created systems to address problems associated with permissions -- in
other words, how transactions are validated. The introduction of the
distributed ledger concept made it possible to distinguish between
different types of blockchain, such as public and consortium. We saw
how this concept was quickly adopted by governments and other
international institutions (see the governmental report titled
*Distributed Ledger Technology: Beyond Blockchain*). The introduction
of distributed ledgers has objectified and subsumed blockchain.

For their part, governments around the world are still seeking the
perfect formula to approach the regulation and governance of the
sector. These most often involve the implementation of measures to
prevent certain uses of cryptocurrencies within national territories.
The very design of blockchains can also be regulated through technical
standardisation and the establishment of international legal
frameworks. In order to gain a better understanding of blockchain
technology, governments have also used case studies and experimental
frameworks to test services and applications before putting
legislation in place. An example of this is the usage of a regulatory
sandbox. Some state actors have attempted to create their own
infrastructure, which can then be adapted to their regulatory
frameworks, such as the European Blockchain Services Infrastructure.
No longer able to ignore the systemic transformations cryptocurrencies
are engendering, countries like Russia, Iran, the UK, and China are
assessing the possibility of creating their own national
cryptocurrencies using blockchain technology.

Thus, the willingness of states to regulate the blockchain must be
examined. We have noted that, in both concrete and conceptual terms,
blockchain technology has created new situations that have called the
prerogatives of national governments into question. As an illustration
of this situation, we have seen how the technical ability to hold and
transfer value through cryptocurrencies can go beyond the framework of
national legal systems when the financial institutions of the
countries in question find themselves in difficulty, as in Venezuela
in 2019. Using domain-name management as an example, we have also seen
how certain responsibilities can be transferred to the global
community through distributed systems. Lastly, we noted that
blockchain has posed profound questions about the conventional systems
used by governments to manage identities. These examples demonstrate
the ways in which blockchain technology and distributed systems are
propelling certain activities beyond national and international
jurisdiction. Some of these activities affect the global community and
are out of step with legal systems designed and conceived at the level
of sovereign states.

Since these states are unable to regulate activities at the global
level, the regulation of blockchains must be looked at through the
prism of new regulatory regimes. Embodied in global law and soft law,
these regimes seek to create the conditions to regulate global
phenomena, such as environmental risks. In the context of blockchain,
this global, non-sovereign law is conceptualised through what we would
term the private and advisory dimensions of standardisation. In other
words, it is implemented through the development of technical
standards such as ISO, or through the formulation of codes of conduct,
charters and other advisory approaches. States are key players in
establishing the normative architecture in this domain, but they do
not pass laws in a vacuum; a whole series of private actors and
non-governmental bodies are also involved.

The intention of this normalisation regime is to define a framework of
constraints designed to regulate the use of blockchain technology, in
order to guide behaviours in directions assumed to be the most
correct. However, because they do not fall under the purview of
national legislative bodies, these rules lack the legitimacy that
would be conferred on them by democratic institutions. Within these
new contexts, no single institution is capable of determining whether
a particular decision safeguards the general interest. Nor can it
determine, what constitutes fair behaviour, or who is to be
responsible for taking decisions that will necessarily have an impact
on society. As a last resort, some of those involved in this field
have looked to the disciplines of ethics and morality to inspire new
standardisation systems. Theories surrounding global administrative
law raise questions regarding equity and justice in decision-making
processes in order to attempt to make global legislators more
accountable.

Blockchain was designed to bring about and manage activities which go
beyond national government jurisdiction. These new, unlegislated
activities can catch some actors by surprise, leaving them stunned and
baffled, unable to respond to the change. We noted that governments
are merely able to react to these situations by noting the effects of
new services after the fact and attempting to contain those effects
that seem to them to be detrimental. If we agree that the role of
government is to act in the general interest within the public arena,
the question then arises as to how it can continue in this role given
the unprecedented social upheaval created by blockchain -- and by
digital and IT services more generally. How can governments not only
anticipate, but also become involved in, the design and execution of
these new activities?

Among the institutional instruments we have looked at in this study,
the regulatory sandboxes produced by the financial sector appear to be
the most advanced. The frameworks put in place by financial regulators
to enable private firms to test small-scale applications in controlled
environments, under the watchful eye of the legislator, appear to
provide the necessary conditions for legislators to revise and adapt
their regulatory frameworks with flexibility. We believe it will be
necessary, at the very least, to roll out these types of systems in
other sectors as well. This will involve the formalisation of
sandboxes to experiment with and test a variety of regulatory
environments, in sectors including agriculture, hospitality, and
health. Sandboxes could also be created to explore, model, prototype,
and test new democratic ways of designing and drafting normative
texts.

These instruments, however effective, cannot remove the need for
collective reflection on the new institutional frameworks that need to
be modelled. As a society, we must address this issue as a matter of
urgency to guard against greed and the risks posed by disruptive
elements. The challenge is to guarantee -- in a democratic and
thoughtful manner -- the general interest in a public space expanded
by information.


